The mind about which we speak and depend upon is a
myth. There’s nothing like mind. Brain is
reality, not the mind. Mind is created by
us reacting to outside, either we react to
conditionings or ego. Thus this mind is created
like bubbles in the ocean of reality, but
that’s not reality.
This mind, whatever we decide, we know, is
very limited, illusive and sometimes shocking.
The mind always move in a linear direction,
and because there’s no reality in it, it
recoils, and boomerangs. Thus all the enterprises,
all the projections so far we have done, it
seems, come back to us. Whatever they discover,
comes back to us as a big destructive power
or a very big shock.
So one has to decide what to do, how to be
out of this trap of our mind. Kundalini is
the solution. When She’s awakened, She takes
you, with that awakening, She takes you beyond
your mind. The first thing is to go beyond
your mind. With mind, you’ll do many things,
but it will not be satisfying, it will be
not a solution, it will not help you. And
when we start depending too much on our mind
we develop all kinds of physical, mental,
emotional problem. Now the latest is the stress,
and this stress has no solution they say,
but in Sahaja Yoga, we find the solution,
by crossing over this mind. It’s like a
barrier for our advancement.
So when you get your realisation, you must
understand that your Kundalini has taken your
attention beyond the mind. Now, this reaction
to outside has come because we human beings
have a prism-like brain, or we can say a prism-like
skull, and when the energy passes into it,
I’ve explained it in My books, it goes into
bifurcations, or you can say refractions,
by which our attention goes out, and we react.
If we react too much, then these bubbles create
a very horrible mind which can lead to any
kind of thing. It justifies itself, it pampers
your ego. The ego and the conditioning that
creates this mind start using this mind for
the purpose of their fulfilment, of their,
all the accumulation of ideas and thoughts
which has no backing, which has no reality
with it.
It’s like we make the computer [and] ultimately
we become slaves of the computer, we make
the watches ourselves, and then we become
slaves of the watches. That’s how it dominates
human beings. And when a person who has a
very strong mind decides to destroy, like
Hitler did, with some idea, he can go on destroying
which has a very far fetched effect on our
culture, on our spirituality.
Now the first step is to become thoughtlessly
aware – where you cross your mind, you go
above your mind, mind cannot affect you. This
is the first stage as we call, is thoughtless
awareness.
Second one is where you start seeing the working
of this Paramchaitanya, of this All-pervading
Power. And you start becoming aware that there
is lot of truth in what Mataji says. That
there is this Power that works out many things.
It works miraculously so many things for you.
It gives you blessings, It guides you, It
helps you in so many ways It helps you. It
gives you good health, good wealth, and also
a very good society of very beautiful people
in the collective. All that you can see clearly
is happening here.
Now this happening of achieving thoughtless
awareness is very simple and easy, but to
maintain at that point is difficult. We still
react and we think. Anything you see, you
react. To get to that point in thoughtless
awareness is first to change your attention.
Now, for example, once we were climbing a
very high mountain to see one temple called
Palitana – Myself, My son-in-law and My
daughter. And we were really tired because
we had to climb, I don’t know how many steps
and when we went up we were tired and there
was a little canopy made of beautiful marble
carving, so we just lay down there ourselves.
They were very tired and they said : “What
is this kind of a temple!” They were grudging.
While I looked up and I saw lots of beautiful
elephants were carved. So I told My son-in-law,
“Look at these elephants, they all have
tails of different types.” He said “Mummy,
we are all dying, how can you see the tails
of elephants?” But is just to divert their
attention from that tiredness [that] I told
them that – why not see the tails of the
elephant, which is very different.
So what happens [is] that, when you are putting
your attention so much to outside all the
time, then you must first of all also divert
your attention. For example, you see these
beautifully made things here. Your attention
is something else – just try to enjoy the
beauty of that. You see. there are beautiful
carpets here – just look at them without
thinking, because they don’t belong to you,
so no headache, they belong to somebody else,
is very good! Otherwise, if it belongs to
you you start thinking ; “Oh, My God, I
have spread them here, what will happen, they
have to be insured!” Or some sort of a thing
like that. That’s common human reaction.
But if it doesn’t belong to you, you can
watch it nicely. Now you watch it and don’t
think. You’ll be amazed, when you see the
beauty that is put inside this, you’ll see
the artist who has put his joy, his exuberance
into it, and you’ll be amazed, after realisation,
that, this exuberance will fill into you and
a cool kind of a relaxation will come into
you, and this Kundalini will rise, and you’ll
become steady in your thoughtless awareness.
So whenever you look at anything, look at
any beautiful thing, even say, today’s election,
just watch the man that is elected. Watching
him, itself, gives him blessings, gives him
better ideas. You get also ideas, which are
coming from reality, which are there – how
to make this man a successful person, or this
country a successful democracy.
All these things happen when your attention
is diverted from criticising, from reacting
– just you watch, become the witness, try
to witness everything. It’s not so very
yet practised, so far, I’ve seen, that,
whenever even we get our, achieve our, realisation,
we don’t realise that we have to witness
everything. When you start witnessing through
your Spirit, then you don’t see the bad
points of another, but you see the good points.
You just pick up the person with very good
points.
So once you see that, the witness state enlarges,
and you start enjoying another person. You
start enjoying every thing that is there,
even a small blade of grass you can enjoy,
if you have that capacity.